TAP workflow refinement (#124)
theupdateframework/taps: tap1.md

We intend TAPs to be the primary mechanisms for proposing major new features, for collecting community input on an issue, and for documenting the design decisions that have gone into TUF.  The TAP author is responsible for building consensus within the community and documenting dissenting opinions.

Because the TAPs are maintained as text files in a versioned repository, their revision history is the historical record of the feature proposal.

# TAP Types

There are two kinds of TAP:
1. A **Standardization** TAP proposes new features for, or changes to existing behavior of, the TUF specification.
2. An **Informational** TAP describes a design issue, general guideline or information for TUF implementers.

# TAP Status

The status of a TAP indicates its progress through the TAP development process. The different status are defined below. Unless otherwise specified, each status applies to both kinds of TAP.

* A **Draft** TAP is one that has been proposed and is actively being worked on.

> * **Active** TAPs are Informational TAPs which are not ever meant to be completed.

Author: As Active is for Informational TAPs it may be applied to TAPs which aren't applied to the specification, such as TAP 1. How does this read?
```suggestion
* **Active** TAPs are Informational TAPs that are expected to change as the specification and the processes around it evolve.
```

## Submitting a TAP

Once the champion has asked the TUF community whether an idea has any chance of acceptance, a draft TAP SHALL be presented as a [pull request](https://github.com/theupdateframework/taps/pulls) to the TAPs repository.  The draft MUST be written in TAP style as described below and in [TAP 2](tap2.md), else it will fail review immediately.

Once the TAP submission is approved for inclusion in the TAP repository, the TAP Editors will assign the TAP a number, give it status "Draft", and merge the initial draft of the TAP.  The [TAP Editors](#tap-editors) will not unreasonably deny a TAP.  Reasons for denying a TAP include duplication of effort, being technically unsound, not providing proper motivation or addressing backwards compatibility, or not in keeping with the TUF philosophy.  [TAP Editors](#tap-editors) may be consulted during the approval phase, with the [Consensus Builder](#consensus-builder) as the final arbiter of the draft's TAP-ability.

> As updates are necessary, the TAP author can submit new versions by opening additional [pull requests](https://github.com/theupdateframework/taps/pulls) against the TAPs repository.

Author: "its repository" reads to me like there's a repository per TAP, rather than a repository for all TAPs. Perhaps
```suggestion
As updates are necessary, the TAP author can submit new versions by opening additional [pull requests](https://github.com/theupdateframework/taps/pulls) against the repository.
```

In order to move a Standardization TAP from "Accepted" to "Final" status, the augmented reference implementation MUST be completed and merged, and any proposed specification changes MUST be integrated into the specification.

For an Informational TAP, no changes to the augmented reference implementation or specification are expected and the TAP may move to "Final" status, without moving through the "Accepted" status, once it is deemed ready by the TAP editors.

> Some informational TAPs may have a status of "Active" if they are not meant to be completed, for example TAP 1 (this TAP).

Author: Similarly to the suggestion for describing the Active status
```suggestion
Informational TAPs may take the status of "Active" if, like this TAP, it is expected to change as the specification and the processes around it evolve.
```

5. *Specification* -- The technical specification should describe the syntax and semantics of any new feature.  The specification should be detailed enough to allow competing, interoperable implementations for at least the current major TUF platforms (TUF, Notary, go-tuf).

6. *Security Analysis* -- The TAP should show, in as simple as possible a manner, why the proposal would not detract from existing security guarantees. (In other words, the proposal should either maintain or add to existing security.) This need not entail a mathematical proof. For example, it may suffice to provide a case-by-case analysis of key compromise over all foreseeable roles. To take another example, if a change is made to delegation, it must preserve existing delegation semantics (unless the TAP makes a good argument for breaking the semantics).

> 7. *Backwards Compatibility* -- All TAPs that introduce backwards incompatibilities must include a section describing these incompatibilities and their severity.  The TAP must explain how the author proposes to deal with these incompatibilities. TAP submissions without a sufficient backwards compatibility treatise may be rejected outright.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
7. *Backwards Compatibility* -- All TAPs that introduce backwards incompatibilities must include a section describing these incompatibilities, their severity, and how the author proposes to deal with them.  TAP submissions without a sufficient backwards compatibility treatise may be rejected outright.
```

> 8. *Augmented Reference Implementation* -- The augmented reference implementation must be completed before any TAP is given status "Final", but it need not be completed before the TAP is accepted as "Draft". While there is merit to the approach of reaching consensus on the specification and rationale before writing code, the principle of "rough consensus and running code" is still useful when it comes to resolving many discussions of API details. The final implementation must include test code and documentation appropriate for the TUF reference.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
8. *Augmented Reference Implementation* -- The augmented reference implementation must be completed before any TAP is given "Final" status, but it need not be completed before the TAP is accepted as "Draft". While there is merit to the approach of reaching consensus on the specification and rationale before writing code, the principle of "rough consensus and running code" is still useful when it comes to resolving many discussions of API details. The final implementation must include test code and documentation appropriate for the TUF reference.
```

* Type: <Standardization | Informational>
* Status: <Draft | Active | Accepted | Deferred | Rejected | Withdrawn | Final | Superseded>
* +Content-Type: <text/markdown>
* +Requires: <pep numbers>
* Created: <date created on, in dd-mmm-yyyy format>
* +TUF-Version: <version number>
* +Replaces: <TAP number>
* +Superseded-By: <TAP number>

The Author header lists the names, and optionally the email addresses of all the authors/owners of the TAP.  The format of the Author header value SHOULD be "Random J. User <address@dom.ain>".

The format of a TAP is specified with a Content-Type header. The acceptable values are "text/markdown" for Markdown TAPs (see [TAP 2](https://github.com/theupdateframework/taps/blob/master/tap2.md)). Markdown ("text/markdown") is the default if no Content-Type header is present.

The Created header records the date that the TAP was assigned a number and SHOULD be in dd-mmm-yyyy format, e.g. 14-Aug-2001.

TAPs will typically have a TUF-Version header which indicates the version of TUF that the feature will be released with. TAPs that refer to processes or recommendations do not require a TUF-Version header.

> TAPs MAY have a Requires header, indicating the TAP numbers that this TAP depends on.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
TAPs MAY have a Requires header, indicating the TAP numbers on which this TAP depends. 
```

> TAPs MAY also have a Superseded-By header indicating that a TAP has been rendered obsolete by a later document; the value is the number of the TAP that replaces the current document.  The newer TAP must have a Replaces header containing the number of the TAP that it rendered obsolete.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
TAPs MAY also have a Superseded-By header indicating that it has been rendered obsolete by a later document; the value is the number of the TAP that replaces the current document.  The newer TAP must have a Replaces header containing the number of the TAP that it rendered obsolete.
```

# Auxiliary Files

> TAPs MAY include auxiliary files such as diagrams. Such files MUST be named ``tap-XXXX-Y.ext``, where "XXXX" is the TAP number, "Y" is a serial number (starting at 1), and "ext" is replaced by the actual file extension (e.g. "png").

Reviewer: ```suggestion
TAPs MAY include auxiliary files such as diagrams. These files MUST be named ``tap-XXXX-Y.ext``, where "XXXX" is the TAP number, "Y" is a serial number (starting at 1), and "ext" is replaced by the actual file extension (e.g. "png").
```

# Reporting TAP Bugs, or Submitting TAP Updates

> How you report a bug, or submit a TAP update depends on several factors, such as the maturity of the TAP, the preferences of the TAP author, and the nature of your comments.  For Draft or Accepted TAPs, feedback should be via the TAPs [issue tracker](https://github.com/theupdateframework/taps/issues) or as a pull request against the TAP in question.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The procedure for reporting a bug, or submitting a TAP update depends on several factors, such as the maturity of the TAP, the preferences of the TAP author, and the nature of the comments.  For Draft or Accepted TAPs, feedback should be via the TAPs [issue tracker](https://github.com/theupdateframework/taps/issues) or as a pull request against the TAP in question.
```

> Once a TAP has been marked Final, bugs or corrections SHOULD be submitted to the TUF [issue tracker](https://github.com/theupdateframework/tuf/issues) so that your changes don't get lost.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Once a TAP has been marked Final, bugs or corrections SHOULD be submitted to the TUF [issue tracker](https://github.com/theupdateframework/tuf/issues) so that changes do not get lost.
```

# Transferring TAP Ownership

> It occasionally becomes necessary to transfer ownership of TAPs to a new champion. In general, it is preferable to retain the original author as a co-author of the transferred TAP, but that's really up to the original author.  A good reason to transfer ownership is because the original author no longer has the time or interest in updating it or following through with the TAP process, or is unreachable (or not responding to email).  A bad reason to transfer ownership is because the author doesn't agree with the direction of the TAP.  One aim of the TAP process is to try to build consensus around a TAP, but if that's not possible, an author can always submit a competing TAP.

Reviewer: The last sentence in this paragraph looks like an important point, but does not seem to have anything to do with transferring ownership. Could this go somewhere else?
```suggestion
It occasionally becomes necessary to transfer ownership of TAPs to a new champion. In general, it is preferable to retain the original author as a co-author of the transferred TAP, but that is really up to the individual.  A good reason to transfer ownership is because the original author no longer has the time or interest in updating it or following through with the TAP process, or is unreachable (or not responding to email).  A bad reason to transfer ownership is because the author doesn't agree with the direction of the TAP.  One aim of the TAP process is to try to build consensus around a TAP, but if that's not possible, an author can always submit a competing TAP.
```

> If you are interested in assuming ownership of a TAP, send a message asking to take over, addressed to both the original author and the [TUF mailing list](https://groups.google.com/forum/?fromgroups#!forum/theupdateframework).  If the original author doesn't respond to email in a timely manner, the TUF team will make a unilateral decision (such decisions may be reversible).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you are interested in assuming ownership of a TAP, send a message stating that request  to both the original author and the [TUF mailing list](https://groups.google.com/forum/?fromgroups#!forum/theupdateframework). If the original author does not respond to the email in a timely manner, the TUF team will make a unilateral decision, though such decisions may be reversible.
```

The more focused the TAP, the more successful it tends to be.  The [TAP Editors](#tap-editors) reserve the right to reject TAP proposals if they appear too unfocused or too broad.  If in doubt, split your TAP into several well-focused ones.

Each TAP must have a champion -- someone who writes the TAP using the style and format described below, shepherds the discussions in the appropriate forums, and attempts to build community consensus around the idea.  The TAP champion (a.k.a. Author) should first attempt to ascertain whether the idea is TAP-able. Posting to the TUF [issue tracker](https://github.com/theupdateframework/specification/issues) or the TUF mailing list are good ways to go about this.

## Submitting a TAP

Once the champion has asked the TUF community whether an idea has any chance of acceptance, a draft TAP should be presented as a [pull request](https://github.com/theupdateframework/taps/pulls) to the TAPs repository.  The draft must be written in TAP style as described below and in [TAP 2](tap2.md), else it will fail review immediately.

> Once the TAP submission is accepted, the TAP Editors will assign the TAP a number, give it status "Draft", and merge the initial draft of the TAP.  The [TAP Editors](#tap-editors) will not unreasonably deny a TAP.  Reasons for denying a TAP include duplication of effort, being technically unsound, not providing proper motivation or addressing backwards compatibility, or not in keeping with the TUF philosophy.  [TAP Editors](#tap-editors) may be consulted during the approval phase, with the [Consensus Builder](#consensus-builder) as the final arbiter of the draft's TAP-ability.

Reviewer 2: I would avoid the word accepted in the first sentence here, I think it gets confused with the Accepted status of a TAP

Author: Quite right. It's one of the things that confused me on a first reading. I've made an edit to remove "accepted", please let me know what you think.

As updates are necessary, the TAP author can submit new versions by opening additional [pull requests](https://github.com/theupdateframework/taps/pulls) against the TAPs repository.

> Standardization TAPs consist of two parts, a design document and an augmented reference implementation. It is generally recommended that at least a prototype implementation be co-developed with the TAP, as ideas that sound good in principle sometimes turn out to be impractical when subjected to the test of implementation. However, a prototype is not required by the TAP process until the TAP is in the "Accepted" status. No TAP will be marked as "Final" until an augmented reference implementation is available.

Reviewer 2: It might be nice to have a quick summary/definition of the TAP statuses early in the document to give some context about the order of the statuses and what they mean

Author: Agreed, this is a good idea. I've pushed a patch defining the TAP statuses.

Because the TAPs are maintained as text files in a versioned repository, their revision history is the historical record of the feature proposal.

# TAP Types

There are two kinds of TAP:
1. A **Standardization** TAP proposes new features for, or changes to existing behavior of, the TUF specification.
2. An **Informational** TAP describes a design issue, general guideline or information for TUF implementers.

> # TAP Status

Reviewer 3: Not necessary, but if not too much to ask, could we have a nice state transition diagram of which status a TAP can go to given its current status?

Author: I finally sat down and figured out enough dot syntax to do this in 291b6ee

> The status of a TAP indicates its progress through the TAP development process. The different status are defined below.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The status of a TAP indicates its progress through the TAP development process. The different status are defined below. Unless otherwise specified, each status applies to all the kinds of TAPs.
```

* **Active** TAPs are Informational TAPs which are not ever meant to be completed.
* An **Accepted** Standardization TAP is deemed ready to be integrated into the specification and augmented reference implementation.
* **Deferred** TAPs are potentially good ideas which are not being actively developed, or where progress is not being made.
* A **Rejected** TAP is one which the [TAP editors](#tap-editors) have decided is ultimately not a good idea.
* **Withdrawn** TAPs are submissions which the champion, or lead author, of the TAP has decided is no longer worth pursuing.
* **Final** TAPs are complete and will no longer change. For Standardization TAPs the proposed changes will have been merged into the augmented reference implementation and the specification.
* A **Superseded** TAP is one which has been rendered obsolete by a newer TAP.

# TAP Workflow

## Consensus Builder

The consensus builder for the TUF specification is Prof. Justin Cappos of the NYU Secure Systems Lab.
Ultimate authority for changes to the TUF specification, including changes proposed through this TAP process, falls to the specification's consensus builder.

## TAP Editors

> The TAP Editors are a team of core contributors to the TUF project who are responsible for reviewing and approving or rejecting any proposed TAPs.

Reviewer 3: Where is the list of previous and current TAP editors?

Author: I wasn't sure whether to include this, not least of all because I don't know what the canonical list of current and previous TAP editors is.

Reviewer 3: Let's point [here](https://github.com/orgs/theupdateframework/teams/tap-editors)?

Author: That url currently returns 404 for people who aren't members of the team. We can make teams and their membership visible, if an org admin or team maintainer is willing to do that I can link to it from here.

https://docs.github.com/en/github/setting-up-and-managing-organizations-and-teams/changing-team-visibility

Reviewer 3: @lukpueh @JustinCappos would you take care of this?

Author: Whoops, I misread the GitHub help. Even visible teams are only visible to members of the organisation, we can't make the team visible to the general public.

Reviewer 3: Ok, no problem, let's not block on this

As updates are necessary, the TAP author can submit new versions by opening additional [pull requests](https://github.com/theupdateframework/taps/pulls) against the TAPs repository.

Standardization TAPs consist of two parts, a design document and an augmented reference implementation. It is generally recommended that at least a prototype implementation be co-developed with the TAP, as ideas that sound good in principle sometimes turn out to be impractical when subjected to the test of implementation. However, a prototype is not required by the TAP process until the TAP is in the "Accepted" status. No TAP will be marked as "Final" until an augmented reference implementation is available.

TAP authors are responsible for collecting community feedback on a TAP before submitting it for review. All comments should be gathered on a [GitHub issue](https://github.com/theupdateframework/taps/issues) specific to the TAP. It is recommended that feedback be solicited via the TUF mailing list.

## TAP Review & Resolution

> Once feedback has been gathered, a change of the TAP to "Accepted" status must be requested via the TAPs [issue tracker](https://github.com/theupdateframework/taps/issues) or a [pull request](https://github.com/theupdateframework/taps/pulls).  TAPs are reviewed by the [TAP Editors](#tap-editors), who may accept or reject a TAP or send it back to the author(s) for revision. For a TAP that is predetermined to be acceptable (e.g., it is an obvious win as-is and/or its implementation has already been checked in) the TUF team may also initiate a TAP review, first notifying the TAP author(s) and giving them a chance to make revisions. In order for a Standardization TAP to be "Accepted" it should have a corresponding prototype implementation for the reference implementation.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Once feedback has been gathered, a change of the TAP to "Accepted" status must be requested via the TAPs [issue tracker](https://github.com/theupdateframework/taps/issues) or a [pull request](https://github.com/theupdateframework/taps/pulls).  TAPs are reviewed by the [TAP Editors](#tap-editors), who may accept or reject a TAP or send it back to the author(s) for revision. For a TAP that is predetermined to be acceptable (e.g., it is an obvious win as-is and/or its implementation has already been checked in) the TUF team may also initiate a TAP review, first notifying the TAP author(s) and giving them a chance to make revisions. In order for a Standardization TAP to be "Accepted", it should have a corresponding prototype implementation for the reference implementation.
```
